#summary Test the External SRAM on a board which supports it

The latest version of this firmware is available in the latest [http://code.google.com/p/micropendous/downloads/list Micropendous Distribution] or via [http://code.google.com/p/micropendous/source/checkout SVN] in the `/Micropendous/Firmware/SRAM_Test` directory.

Instructions for using the external SRAM are [http://www.micropendous.org/SRAM available].

*Purpose:* SRAM_Test uses the [http://www.fourwalledcubicle.com/LUFA.php LUFA] USB library to send random bytes of data to a [http://www.micropendous.org/Micropendous4 Micropendous4] board's SRAM then checks to make sure it is read back correctly.  The firmware also runs internal SRAM tests.

*Source Code:* [http://code.google.com/p/micropendous/source/browse/trunk/Micropendous/Firmware/SRAM_TestView] or [http://www.Micropendous.org/Distribution Download]

*Targets:* [Micropendous4] with 128kbytes of external SRAM

*USB Mode:* Device-mode enumerating as USB Virtual Serial Port

*Status:* _Working_.  Please post any problems you encounter to the [http://groups.google.com/group/Micropendous Micropendous Group].

== Usage ==

Compile and load the SRAM_Test firmware onto your USB AVR by following the [ProgramAndTest] tutorial.

Reset your board and find out which Serial Port it enumerated to using the instructions in [Serial].

Run the Python test program with `python TestSRAM.py COM5 0` where `COM5` is the serial port name and `0` is the maximum number of bytes to test (`0` means test them all).


== Firmware Design ==

This is just [USBVirtualSerial] with a command interface for reading and writing to the external SRAM.  More info on how the SRAM is accessed is [http://www.micropendous.org/SRAM available].  SRAM is accessed via the _"Slightly Complex"_ array method.

The `TestEXTSRAM()` function also performs pattern tests on the external SRAM.